---
title: Kamailio by example - Introduction
excerpt: Kamailio by example - Notes and resources about kamailio
permalink: /kamailio/intro/
header:
  image: /assets/images/academy/kamailio.svg
last_modified_at: 2024-06-26 09:53:23
toc: true
author: marcelo
---
## Intro

> :information_source: **Note:** Read the [official docs](https://www.kamailio.org/wikidocs/cookbooks/devel/core/) to get the most updated information.

Now that we have resources to learn about Kamailio and a lab ready to test it, let's do our `Hello, World!`
### hello
```c#
loadmodule "sl"

request_route {
  sl_send_reply(200, "Hello, World!");
}
```

This is our `kamailio.cfg`.

Kamailio will read it from the default location, which is `/etc/kamailio/` for package installations and `/usr/local/etc/kamailio/` when building from source. However, this file path can be specified with a `-f <path>`.

This `hello` example is simply:
- Loading the [sl](https://www.kamailio.org/docs/modules/stable/modules/sl.html) module: `loadmodule "sl"`.
    - This module is responsible for stateless requests handling and is needed because we are using its `sl_send_reply()` function.
- Defining the `request_route`.
    - The only mandatory routing block is `request_route`, which contains the actions for deciding the routing for SIP requests.
- Sending a stateless reply.
    - A `200 Hello, World!` reply is sent using the `sl_send_reply()` function.

> If you are not familiar with stateless/stateful proxies, check [SIP Concepts](/sip/concepts/).

### Config
Kamailio uses its own configuration file language (native scripting). The structure can be splited in three parts:
* global parameters
* modules settings
* routing blocks

**Characteristics**
- Lines with instructions have to end with a semicolon `;`. Global parameters do not need it, unless values are defined in multiple lines.
* Comments start with `#` or `//` if single line or `/* comment */` for multi-line

#### Global Parameters

This is the first part of the configuration file, containing the parameters for the *core and custom* global settings. Typically, this is formed by directives of the form `name=value`. We don't have global parameters, so let's add some:
```c#
#!defenvs KAMA_LISTEN
listen=KAMA_LISTEN
auto_aliases=no
```
- `defenvs` defines an ID to the value of an **env variable**, that will be used by `listen`.
  - This `#!` means a pre-processing directive, that we will learn in another article.
- `listen` defines the address to listen to instead of listening on all available addresses.
- `auto_aliases` setting it to `no`, to disable the reverse DNS lookup and make the startup faster.

> You can find the full list of core parameters in the [Core Cookbook](https://www.kamailio.org/wikidocs/cookbooks/devel/core/).

#### Modules Settings

This section contains the directives to load modules (`loadmodule`) and set their parameters (`modparam`).

```c#
loadmodule "sl"
modparam("sl", "bind_tm", 0)
```
We are adding this `modparam` setting to disable the bind to the `tm` module, that we do not use or load, thus removing the warning we see in the logs.
> You can find the full list of modules in the [Modules Documentation](https://kamailio.org/docs/modules/stable/).

### Routing Blocks

The routing blocks are similar to functions, which can be executed many times at runtime and contain the routing logic for SIP traffic.

```c#
request_route {
  sl_send_reply(200, "Hello, World!");
}
```

The only mandatory routing block is `request_route`, which contains the actions for deciding the routing for SIP requests.

Route blocks can also be executed on timer events (e.g., retransmission timeout) or particular events specific to modules.

> This is a small introduction to a configuration, but we will get into more detail in the next sections.

#### How to test
Check the [kamalab](/kamailio/kamalab/) to prepare your lab.
```sh
# kamalab ❯
./kamalab
# select 0.2.1-hello.cfg
# Listening on
#              udp: 127.0.0.2 [127.0.0.2]:5060
#              tcp: 127.0.0.2 [127.0.0.2]:5060
# Aliases:
```

In another terminal let's send OPTIONS to the server:
```sh
# >
sipexer 127.0.0.2
# ...
# OPTIONS sip:127.0.0.2:5060 SIP/2.0
# ...
# SIP/2.0 200 Hello, World!
# ...
```

We can see the response to our request: `200 Hello, World!`
#### Resources
* [Wiki Core Cookbook](https://www.kamailio.org/wikidocs/cookbooks/devel/core/)
