---
id: 1.0-kemi
aliases: []
tags: []
author: marcelo
excerpt: Kamailio by example - Notes and resources about kamailio
header:
  image: /assets/svg/academy/kamailio.svg
  og_image: /assets/png/academy/kamailio.png
last_modified_at: 2024-06-26 09:26:32
permalink: /kamailio/kemi/
title: "Kamailio by example - KEMI: Introduction with lua"
toc: true
---
## KEMI

> :information_source: **Note:** Read the [official docs](https://kamailio.org/docs/tutorials/devel/kamailio-kemi-framework) to get the most updated information.

Kamailio Embedded Interface (KEMI) allows you to use various scripting languages to write Kamailio configuration scripts. This flexibility lets you leverage the features and libraries of languages like **Lua, Python** and others, for your SIP server configurations.

> While the native scripting language offers a large set of functions but its limits are met in some cases, especially when in need to integrate with external systems.
> Another missing feature in the native is reloading without a restart.

The main benefits of using KEMI framework:
- Reload of routing scripts without restarting of Kamailio;
- More complete and flexible scripting languages, with larger set of libraries that can be used from the scripting languages;
- Possibility to test the code;

### Interpreter

The KEMI allows the equivalent of **routing** blocks to be written in a different scripting language, as functions.
Each supported language has a **module** that links Kamailio to the scripting interpreter:

```c#
// kamailio.cfg

// global parameters
// module settings

loadmodule <KEMI_MODULE>
modparam(<KEMI_MODULE>, "load", <SCRIPT_PATH>)

cfgengine <KEMI_INTERPERTER>
// routing in <SCRIPT_PATH>
```
#### Functions

Several functions directly to `KSR` module with the format `KSR.function(params)`, , like `KSR.is_myself("sip:127.0.0.1:5060")` which are mostly the main functions from the core and for writing log messages (from `xlog`).

There's also exported functions from modules, with the format `KSR.module.function(params)`  The function name may not be exact since the native configuration allow dynamic arguments, unlike the scripting versions, like `KSR.dispatcher.ds_is_from_list_uri(int groupid, int mode, str "uri")`.

The `KSR.x` submodule provides special functions that need custom code per interpreter.
- `KSR.x.modf(str "fname", params...)` Execute a function, if not available in KSR.
- `KSR.x.exit()` Equivalent of `exit` from native, since the `exit` will exit the app in some languages. Use `return` as an alternative.
- `KSR.x.drop()` Equivalent of `drop` from native kamailio.

### Lua

As we saw in the KEMI intro, we just need load the module, set the load path, and the `cfgengine`:

```c#
#!defenvs KAMA_LISTEN
listen=KAMA_LISTEN
auto_aliases=no

loadmodule "sl"
modparam("sl", "bind_tm", 0)

loadmodule "app_lua"
modparam("app_lua", "load", "/etc/kamailio/cfg/1-kemi/100-kemi-lua.lua")

cfgengine "lua"
```

```lua
function ksr_request_route()
    KSR.sl.send_reply(200, "Hello, World!")
end
```

**How to test:** Check the [kamalab](/kamailio/kamalab/) to prepare your lab.
```sh
# kamalab ❯
./kamalab
# select kemi-lua
# Listening on
#              udp: 127.0.0.2 [127.0.0.2]:5060
#              tcp: 127.0.0.2 [127.0.0.2]:5060
# Aliases:
```

In another terminal let's send OPTIONS to the server:
```sh
# >
sipexer 127.0.0.2
# ...
# OPTIONS sip:127.0.0.2:5060 SIP/2.0
# ...
# SIP/2.0 200 Hello, World!
# ...
```

We see that:
* We get the `200 Hello, World!` response version in lua.

#### Resources
* [Wiki Pseudo-Variables Cookbook](https://www.kamailio.org/wikidocs/cookbooks/devel/pseudovariables/)
* [NickvsNetworking](https://nickvsnetworking.com/kamailio-bytes-kemi-intro/)
