---
title: "Rust - Data Types: Collections"
permalink: /rust/type-ops/
excerpt: "Notes and resources about rust."
header:
  image: "/assets/images/academy/rust.svg"
last_modified_at: 2023-06-28 00:00:00 +00:00
toc: true
---

> :information_source: **Note:** Read the [offical docs](https://www.rust-lang.org/learn) to get the most updated information.

### Data Types: Collections

Summary:

```rs
let my_tuple = (500, 6.4, 1);
let my_array = [1, 2, 3, 4];
```

#### Compound types

Rust has two *primitive* compound types: `tuples` and `arrays`, which can group multiple values into one type.

##### Tuples

Tuples have a **fixed** length: once declared, they cannot grow or shrink in size.

We create a tuple with `(,)`
The types of the different values in the tuple don't have to be the same.

```rs
let tup: (i32, f64, u8) = (500, 6.4, 1);

let (x, y, z) = tup;
let five_hundred = tup.0;

println!("The value of y is: {y}, five_hundred is {five_hundred}");
```

* To get the individual values out of a tuple, we can use pattern matching to destructure a tuple value.
* This is called destructuring because it breaks the single tuple into three parts.
* We can also access a tuple element directly by using a period `.` followed by the index of the value we want to access.
* The tuple without any values is a `unit` written as `()`. Expressions implicitly return the unit value.

### Arrays

Every element of an array must have the same type and have a fixed length.

```rs
let a: [i32; 5] = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
// After the semicolon, 5 indicates the array contains five elements
let b = [3; 5]; // let a = [3, 3, 3, 3, 3];

let first = a[0];
```

* If the index is greater than or equal to the length, Rust will panic at runtime.










```sh
################################################################################
################################################################################
################################################################################
```

Arrays are useful when you want your data allocated on the stack rather than the heap or when you want to ensure you always have a fixed number of elements. A vector is a similar collection type that is allowed to grow or shrink in size.


Most other data types represent one specific value, but collections can contain multiple values.

Unlike the built-in array and tuple types, the data these collections point to is stored on the heap, which means the amount of data does not need to be known at compile time and can grow or shrink as the program runs.

Collections that are used very often in Rust programs:

* A vector allows you to store a variable number of values next to each other.
* A string is a collection of characters. We’ve mentioned the String type previously, but in this chapter we’ll talk about it in depth.
* A hash map allows you to associate a value with a particular key. It’s a particular implementation of the more general data structure called a map.



i'm here
* https://rust-book.cs.brown.edu/ch03-02-data-types.html#compound-types
