---
title: "Go: Introduction"
permalink: /go/intro/
excerpt: "Notes and resources about go."
header:
  image: "/assets/images/academy/go.svg"
last_modified_at: 2021-12-26 00:00:00 +00:00
toc: true
---

> :information_source: **Note:** Read the [offical references](https://go.dev/learn) to get the most updated information.

## Introduction

Go is a statically typed, compiled programming language, syntactically similar to C.

#### Exported names
A name is exported if it begins with a capital letter. For example `Println`, which is exported from the `fmt` package. When a package is imported, only entities (functions, types, variables, constants) whose names start with a capital letter can be used / accessed. The recommended style of naming in Go is that identifiers will be named using `camelCase`, except for those meant to be accessible across packages which should be `CamelCase`.


### Variables

The var statement declares a list of variables; as in function argument lists, the type is last.
A var statement can be at package or function level.
Variables can be defined by explicitly specifying a type:
```go
var explicit int // Explicitly typed

  // declaring multiple vars
var c, python, java bool
```

A var declaration can include **initializers** (one per variable), in which the type can be omitted and the variable will take the type of the initializer.

```go
var c, python, java = true, false, "no!"

  // using blocks
var (
	ToBe   bool       = false
	MaxInt uint64     = 1<<64 - 1
	z      complex128 = cmplx.Sqrt(-5 + 12i)
)
```

Inside a function, the `:=` short assignment statement can be used in place of a var declaration with implicit type.

Outside a function, every statement begins with a keyword (var, func, and so on) and so the `:=` construct is not available.

Once declared, variables can be assigned values using the `=` operator. Once declared, a variable's type can never change.

```go
count := 1 // Assign initial value. Implicitly typed as an int
count = 2  // Update to new value

c, python, java := true, false, "no!"
```

#### Constants
Constants are declared like variables, but with the `const` keyword.
It can be characters, strings, booleans, or numeric values, but cannot be declared using the `:=` syntax.

```go
const Pi = 3.14
```
Constants hold a piece of data just like variables, but their value cannot change during the execution of the program.

### Comments

Note that Go supports two types of comments. Single line comments are preceded by `//` and multi-line comments are inserted between `/* and */`.


### Documentation

In Go, comments play an important role in documenting code. They are used by the `go doc` command, which extracts these comments to create documentation about Go packages. A documentation comment should be a complete sentence that starts with the name of the thing being described and ends with a period `.` .

Comments should precede packages as well as exported identifiers(functions, methods, package variables, constants, and structs).

* Any public function that is not both obvious and short must be commented.
* Any function in a library must be commented regardless of length or complexity

```go

  // A package-level variable can look like this:

// TemperatureCelsius represents a certain temperature in degrees Celsius.
var TemperatureCelsius float64

  // Package comments should be written directly before a package clause and begin with `Package x ...`

// Package kelvin provides tools to convert
// temperatures to and from Kelvin.
package kelvin

  //It should explain what arguments the function takes, what it does with them, and what its return values mean

// CelsiusFreezingTemp returns an integer value equal to the temperature at which water freezes in degrees Celsius.
func CelsiusFreezingTemp() int {
	return 0
}
```
