---
title: "Go: Data Types: Basic Types"
permalink: /go/types/
excerpt: "Notes and resources about go."
header:
  image: "/assets/images/academy/golang.svg"
last_modified_at: 2021-12-26 00:00:00 +00:00
toc: true
---

> :information_source: **Note:** Read the [offical references](https://go.dev/learn) to get the most updated information.

### Data Types: Basic Types

Basic Types:

```yml
booleans: bool
text: string
numbers:
  - int  int8  int16  int32  int64
  - uint uint8 uint16 uint32 uint64 uintptr # unsigned
  - float32 float64
  - complex64 complex128
alias:
  - byte # alias for uint8
  - rune # alias for int32, represents a Unicode code point
```

### Type inference
When declaring a variable without specifying an explicit type, the variable's type is inferred from the value on the right hand side.

```go
var i int
j := i // j is an int

fmt.Printf("j is of type %T\n", j)
```

* Numeric constants are high-precision values. An untyped constant takes the type needed by its context.

### Booleans

Booleans in Go are represented by the predeclared boolean type `bool`, which values can be either `true` or `false`.

```go
var closed bool    // boolean variable 'closed' implicitly initialized with 'false'
speeding := true   // boolean variable 'speeding' initialized with 'true'
hasError := false  // boolean variable 'hasError' initialized with 'false'
```

### Integer Numbers

The `int, uint, and uintptr` types are usually 32 bits wide on 32-bit systems and 64 bits wide on 64-bit systems. `uintptr` is an unsigned integer large enough to store the uninterpreted bits of a pointer value.


### Floating-point numbers

A floating-point number is a number with zero or more digits behind the decimal separator.

Different floating-point types can store different numbers of digits after the digit separator - this is referred to as its precision.

Go has two floating-point types:

- `float32`: 32 bits (~6-9 digits precision).
- `float64`: 64 bits (~15-17 digits precision). This is the default floating-point type.

By default, Go will use `float64` for floating-point numbers, unless the floating-point number is:

1. assigned to a variable with type `float32`, or
2. returned from a function with return type `float32`, or
3. passed as an argument to the `float32()` function.



### runes


The `rune` type in Go is an alias for `int32`. Given this underlying `int32` type, the `rune` type holds a signed 32-bit integer value. However, unlike an `int32` type, the integer value stored in a `rune` type represents a single Unicode character.

## Unicode and Unicode Code Points

Unicode is a superset of ASCII that represents characters by assigning a unique number to every character. This unique number is called a Unicode code point. Unicode aims to represent all the world's characters including various alphabets, numbers, symbols, and even emoji as Unicode code points.

In Go, the `rune` type represents a single Unicode code point.

The following table contains example Unicode characters along with their Unicode code point and decimal values:

| Unicode Character | Unicode Code Point | Decimal Value |
|-------------------|--------------------|---------------|
| 0                 | `U+0030`           | `48`          |
| A                 | `U+0041`           | `65`          |
| a                 | `U+0061`           | `97`          |
| ¿                 | `U+00BF`           | `191`         |
| π                 | `U+03C0`           | `960`         |
| 🧠                | `U+1F9E0`          | `129504`      |


UTF-8 is a variable-width character encoding that is used to encode every Unicode code point as 1, 2, 3, or 4 bytes. Since a Unicode code point can be encoded as a maximum of 4 bytes, the `rune` type needs to be able to hold up to 4 bytes of data. That is why the `rune` type is an alias for `int32` as an `int32` type is capable of holding up to 4 bytes of data.

Go source code files are encoded using UTF-8.

## Using Runes

Variables of type `rune` are declared by placing a character inside single quotes:

```go
myRune := '¿'
```

Since `rune` is just an alias for `int32`, printing a rune's type will yield `int32`:

```go
myRune := '¿'
fmt.Printf("myRune type: %T\n", myRune)
// Output: myRune type: int32
```

Similarly, printing a rune's value will yield its integer (decimal) value:

```go
myRune := '¿'
fmt.Printf("myRune value: %v\n", myRune)
// Output: myRune value: 191
```

To print the Unicode character represented by the rune, use the `%c` formatting verb:

```go
myRune := '¿'
fmt.Printf("myRune Unicode character: %c\n", myRune)
// Output: myRune Unicode character: ¿
```

To print the Unicode code point represented by the rune, use the `%U` formatting verb:

```go
myRune := '¿'
fmt.Printf("myRune Unicode code point: %U\n", myRune)
// Output: myRune Unicode code point: U+00BF
```
