---
title: Java Message Service Concepts
date: 2018-04-20 00:00:00 +01:00
header:
  teaser: "/assets/images/academy/jms.png"
categories:
- academy
tags:
- academy
- sysadmin
---

**Messaging**
Messaging is a method of communication between software components or applications. A messaging system is a peer-to-peer facility: A messaging client can send messages to, and receive messages from, any other client. Each client connects to a messaging agent that provides facilities for creating, sending, receiving, and reading messages.

Enables distributed communication:
* *loosely coupled*: The sender and the receiver do not have to be available at the same time in order to communicate. In fact, the sender does not need to know anything about the receiver, nor does the receiver need to know anything about the sender. The sender and the receiver need to know only which message format and which destination to use. Differs from *tightly coupled* technologies, such as RMI, which require an application to know a remote application's methods.
* *Asynchronous*: A receiving client does not have to receive messages at the same time the sending client sends them. The sending client can send them and go on to other tasks; the receiving client can receive them much later.
* *Reliable*: A messaging provider that implements the JMS API can ensure that a message is delivered once and only once. Lower levels of reliability are available for applications that can afford to miss messages or to receive duplicate messages.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

##### What Is the JMS API?
The Java Message Service is a Java API that allows applications to create, send, receive, and read messages. The JMS API defines a common set of interfaces and associated semantics that allow programs written in the Java programming language to communicate with other messaging implementations.

The JMS API minimizes the set of concepts a programmer must learn in order to use messaging products but provides enough features to support sophisticated messaging applications. It also strives to maximize the portability of JMS applications across JMS providers.

JMS enables communication that is not only loosely coupled but also

Asynchronous: A receiving client does not have to receive messages at the same time the sending client sends them. The sending client can send them and go on to other tasks; the receiving client can receive them much later.

Reliable: A messaging provider that implements the JMS API can ensure that a message is delivered once and only once. Lower levels of reliability are available for applications that can afford to miss messages or to receive duplicate messages.

The current version of the JMS specification is Version 2.0. You can download a copy of the specification from the Java Community Process website: http://www.jcp.org/en/jsr/detail?id=343.



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

* JMS: https://javaee.github.io/tutorial/jms-concepts001.html

The current version


Queue:
 - Point-to-point model.
 - Only one consumer gets the message.
 - Messages have to be delivered in the order sent.
 - A JMS queue only guarantees that each message is processed only once.
 - The Queue knows who the consumer or the JMS client is. The destination is known.
 - The JMS client (the consumer) does not have to be  active or connected to the queue all the time to receive or read the message.
 - Every message successfully processed is acknowledged by the consumer.

Topic:
 - Publish/subscribe model.
 - Multiple clients subscribe to the message.
 - There is no guarantee messages have to be delivered in the order sent.
 - There is no guarantees that each message is processed only once.As this can be sensed from the model.
 - The Topic, have multiple subscribers and there is a chance that the topic does not know all the subscribers. The destination is unknown.
 - The subscriber / JMS client needs to the active when the messages are produced by the producer, unless the subscription was a durable subscription.
 - No, Every message successfully processed is not acknowledged by the consumer/subscriber.

JMS Module
JMS Server
Sub Deployment
Connt Fact
Presiste Store
Un Dist Queue

Learn more in the [Java EE documentation](https://javaee.github.io/tutorial/jms-concepts001.html)

https://docs.oracle.com/javaee/6/tutorial/doc/bncdx.html
https://docs.oracle.com/cd/E19316-01/820-6424/aeraq/index.html
