---
title: Message Queue
date: 2018-08-03 00:00:00 +01:00
header:
  teaser: "/assets/images/academy/mq.png"
categories:
- academy
tags:
- academy
- sysadmin
---

### Message-Oriented Middleware (MOM)

*Message Oriented Middleware* (MOM) makes use of messaging provider to mediate messaging operations between distributed systems.

The basic elements of a MOM system are clients, messages, and the MOM provider, which includes an API and administrative tools.
A client makes an API call to send a message to a destination managed by the provider. The provider services route and deliver the message, retaining the message until a receiving client retrieves it.

The messaging provider have administrative tools, to monitor and tune performance. Since it's an asynchronous system, the clients can continue to load work and can use all resources, failing the message handling.

The MOM provider uses different architectures to route and deliver messages: it can use a centralized message server or it can distribute routing and delivery functions to each client machine. Some MOM products combine these two approaches.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### JMS as a MOM Standard
The Java Messaging Service specification was developed to allow Java applications access to existing MOM systems, following essential elements of existing messaging systems:
* The concept of a *messaging provider* that routes and delivers messages
* Support for reliable message delivery
* Distinct messaging patterns or domains such as point-to-point messaging and publish/subscribe messaging
* Facilities for pushing messages to message consumers (asynchronous receipt) and having them pulled by message consumers (synchronous receipt).
* Common message formats such as stream, text and byte

A JMS provider can be created as a :
* *Stand-alone product* used to define the backbone of an EAI system.
* *Embedded component* in a larger distributed runtime system to support inter-component messaging, such as a Java EE AS, to implement message-driven beans and to allow EJB components to send and receive messages asynchronously

To have created a standard that included all features of existing systems would have resulted in a system that was hard to learn and difficult to implement. Instead, JMS defined a least common denominator of messaging concepts and features. This resulted in a standard that is easy to learn and that maximizes the portability of JMS applications across JMS providers. It’s important to note that JMS is an API standard, not a protocol standard. Because all JMS clients implement the same interface, it is easy to port one vendor's clinet to another vendor's JMS provide implementation. But different JMS vendors typically cannot communicate directly with one another.


In order to send or receive messages, a JMS client must first connect to a JMS message server (most often called a broker): the connection opens a channel of communication between the client and the broker. Next, the client must set up a session for creating, producing, and consuming messages. You can think of the session as a stream of messages defining a particular conversation between the client and the broker. The client itself is a message producer and/or a message consumer. The message producer sends a message to a destination that the broker manages. The message consumer accesses that destination to consume the message. The message includes a header, optional properties, and a body. The body holds the data; the header contains information the broker needs to route and manage the message; and the properties can be defined by client applications or by a provider to serve their own needs in processing messages. Connections, sessions, destinations, messages, producers, and consumers are the basic objects that make up a JMS application.

Using these basic objects, a client application can use two messaging patterns (or domains) to send and receive messages.


#### Resources
* [Sun Java System Message Queue 4.3 Technical Overview](https://docs.oracle.com/cd/E19316-01/820-6424/index.html)
* [Sun Java System Message Queue 4.3 Administration Guide](https://docs.oracle.com/cd/E19316-01/820-6740/index.html)


* https://www.soapui.org/jms/working-with-jms-messages.html
* https://www.lynda.com/Spring-tutorials/Understanding-message-queues-servers/697735/753632-4.html
* https://vimeo.com/12654513
* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Loose_coupling
* https://www.oracle.com/webfolder/technetwork/tutorials/obe/java/JMSProducer/JMSProducer.html 
