---
title: Message Queue
date: 2018-04-20 00:00:00 +01:00
header:
  teaser: "/assets/images/academy/mq.png"
categories:
- academy
tags:
- academy
- sysadmin
---

### Message-Oriented Middleware (MOM)
Because businesses, institutions, and technologies change continually, the software systems that serve them must be able to accommodate such changes. Following a merger, the addition of a service, or the expansion of available services, a business can ill afford to recreate its information systems. It is at this most critical point that it needs to integrate new components or to scale existing ones as efficiently as possible. The easiest way to integrate heterogeneous components is not to recreate them as homogeneous elements but to provide a layer that allows them to communicate despite their differences. This layer, called middleware, allows software components (applications, enterprise java beans, servlets, and other components) that have been developed independently and that run on different networked platforms to interact with one another. It is when this interaction is possible that the network can become the computer.

As shown in Figure 1–1, conceptually, middleware resides between the application layer and the platform layer (the operating system and underlying network services).

Applications distributed on different network nodes use the application interface to communicate without having to be concerned with the details of the operating environments that host other applications nor with the services that connect them to these applications. In addition, by providing an administrative interface, this new, virtual system of interconnected applications can be made reliable and secure. Its performance can be measured and tuned, and it can be scaled without losing function.

Middleware can be grouped into the following categories:

Remote Procedure Call or RPC-based middleware, which allows procedures in one application to call procedures in remote applications as if they were local calls. The middleware implements a linking mechanism that locates remote procedures and makes these transparently available to a caller. Traditionally, this type of middleware handled procedure-based programs; it now also includes object-based components.

Object Request Broker or ORB-based middleware, which enables an application’s objects to be distributed and shared across heterogeneous networks.

Message Oriented Middleware or MOM-based middleware, which allows distributed applications to communicate and exchange data by sending and receiving messages.

All these models make it possible for one software component to affect the behavior of another component over a network. They are different in that RPC- and ORB-based middleware create systems of tightly-coupled components, whereas MOM-based systems allow for a looser coupling of components. In an RPC- or ORB-based system, when one procedure calls another, it must wait for the called procedure to return before it can do anything else. In these synchronous messaging models, the middleware functions partly as a super-linker, locating the called procedure on a network and using network services to pass function or method parameters to the procedure and then to return results.

MOM-based systems allows communication to happen through the asynchronous exchange of messages, 


#### Resources
* [Sun Java System Message Queue 4.3 Technical Overview](https://docs.oracle.com/cd/E19316-01/820-6424/index.html)
