---
title: InfluxDB
date: 2018-04-20 00:00:00 +01:00
header:
  teaser: "/assets/images/academy/influxdb.png"
categories:
- academy
tags:
- academy
- sysadmin
---

A **Time Series Database** is a database optimised for time-stamped data. Time series are simply measurements or events that are tracked, monitored, down-sampled, and aggregated over time. It have key architectural properties that make them very different: time-stamp data storage and compression, data life-cycle management, data summarization, ability to handle large time series dependent scans of many records, and time series aware queries. The main DBs are InfluxDB, RDDtool, Prometheus and Graphite.

**InfluxDB** is an open source **time series database** with **no external dependencies**. It's useful for recording metrics, events, and performing analytics. Features:

* Built-in [HTTP API](https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/latest/guides/writing_data/) so you don't have to write any server side code to get up and running.
* Data can be tagged, allowing very flexible querying.
* **SQL-like query** language.
* Simple to install and manage, and fast to get data in and out.
* It aims to answer queries in real-time. That means every data point is  indexed as it comes in and is immediately available in queries that  should return in < 100ms.


#### Usage

##### Connect to InfluxDB
```bash
influx -username admin -password pass -port 8086 -precision rfc3339 -database mydb
```
> The InfluxDB HTTP API runs on port 8086 by default. Therefore, influx will connect to port 8086 and localhost by default. If you need to alter these defaults, run influx --help.
The -precision argument specifies the format/precision of any returned timestamps. In the example above, rfc3339 tells InfluxDB to return timestamps in RFC3339 format (YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SS.nnnnnnnnnZ).

```bash
  # Insert some data
curl -XPOST "http://localhost:8086/write?db=mydb" \
-d 'cpu,host=server01,region=uswest load=42 1434055562000000000'
  # Query for the data
curl -G "http://localhost:8086/query?pretty=true" --data-urlencode "db=mydb" \
--data-urlencode "q=SELECT * FROM cpu WHERE host='server01' AND time < now() - 1d"
  # Query for the data
curl -G "http://localhost:8086/query?pretty=true" --data-urlencode "db=mydb" \
--data-urlencode "q=SELECT mean(load) FROM cpu WHERE region='uswest'"
```

##### exploring data

```sql
  -- Returns a list of all databases on your instance
SHOW DATABASES

  -- Select a Database
Use call_centre_metrics_a

  -- A shard contains the actual encoded and compressed data, and is represented by a TSM file on disk.
SHOW SHARDS

  -- Queries that run automatically and periodically on realtime data and store query results in a specified measurement.
SHOW CONTINUOUS QUERIES

  -- Returns a list of retention policies (how long InfluxDB keeps data (duration), how many copies of those data are stored
  -- in the cluster (replication factor), and the time range covered by shard groups (shard group duration)) for the specified database
SHOW RETENTION POLICIES

  -- Returns a list of measurements (data stored in the associated fields. Measurements are strings.)for the specified database.
SHOW MEASUREMENTS

  -- Returns a list of series (The collection of data in InfluxDB's data structure that share a measurement, tag set, and retention policy) for the specified database.
SHOW SERIES

  -- like field, but tags are indexed so queries on tags are performant
SHOW TAG KEYS

  -- Records metadata and the actual data value
SHOW FIELD KEYS

  -- Check values in MEASUREMENTS
SELECT * FROM measurement


SELECT *  FROM "_internal".."database" WHERE time > now() - 10s
select count(*) FROM measurement

```

### Basic Concepts

Time series have zero to many points, one for each discrete sample of the metric. Points consist of time (a timestamp), a measurement, at least one key-value field (the measured value itself) and zero to many key-value tags containing any metadata about the value.


----------------------

> Note: Not working on influxdb-1.3.2 due to bug [8677](https://github.com/influxdata/influxdb/issues/8677).

```
  # Backup
influxdb@mo$ influxd backup -database <dbname> -since 2018-06-25T00:00:00Z /tmp/backup
  # Restore

  # Note: Restoring from backup is only supported while the InfluxDB daemon is stopped
influxdb@mo$ service influxdb stop
influxdb@mo$ influxd restore -database <dbname> -datadir /var/lib/influxdb/data /tmp/backup
influxdb@mo$ sudo chown -R influxdb:influxdb /var/lib/influxdb
influxdb@mo$ service influxdb start
```

## influxdb-relay

This project adds a basic high availability layer to InfluxDB. With the right architecture and disaster recovery processes, this achieves a highly available setup.

The load balancer should point UDP traffic and HTTP POST requests with the path /write to the two relays while pointing GET requests with the path /query to the two InfluxDB servers.

```
         ┌─────────────────┐
         │  write & query  │
         └────────┬────────┘
          ┌───────v───────┐
┌─────────│ Load Balancer │─────────┐
│/query   └──────^─^──────┘   /query│
│        ┌───────┘ └───────┐        │
│        │     /write      │        │
│  ┌─────v────┐       ┌────v─────┐  │
│  │   Relay  │       │   Relay  │  │
│  └──┬────┬──┘       └───┬──┬───┘  │
│     |  ┌─┼──────────────┘  |      │
│     │  │ └──────────────┐  │      │
│  ┌──v──v────┐       ┌───v──v───┐  │
└─>│ InfluxDB │       │ InfluxDB │<─┘
   └──────────┘       └──────────┘
```

The relay will listen for HTTP or UDP writes and write the data to each InfluxDB server via the HTTP write or UDP endpoint, as appropriate. If the write is sent via HTTP, the relay will return a success response as soon as one of the InfluxDB servers returns a success. If any InfluxDB server returns a 4xx response, that will be returned to the client immediately. If all servers return a 5xx, a 5xx will be returned to the client. If some but not all servers return a 5xx that will not be returned to the client. You should monitor each instance's logs for 5xx errors.

With this setup a failure of one Relay or one InfluxDB can be sustained while still taking writes and serving queries. However, the recovery process might require operator intervention.

#### Buffering

The relay can be configured to buffer failed requests for HTTP backends.
The intent of this logic is reduce the number of failures during short outages or periodic network issues.
> This retry logic is **NOT** sufficient for for long periods of downtime as all data is buffered in RAM


#### Recovery

InfluxDB organizes its data on disk into logical blocks of time called shards. We can use this to create a hot recovery process with zero downtime.

The length of time that shards represent in InfluxDB are typically 1 hour, 1 day, or 7 days, depending on the retention duration, but can be explicitly set when creating the retention policy. For the sake of our example, let's assume shard durations of 1 day.

Let's say one of the InfluxDB servers goes down for an hour on 2016-03-10. Once midnight UTC rolls over, all InfluxDB processes are now writing data to the shard for 2016-03-11 and the file(s) for 2016-03-10 have gone cold for writes. We can then restore things using these steps:

1. Tell the load balancer to stop sending query traffic to the server that was down (this should be done as soon as an outage is detected to prevent partial or inconsistent query returns.)
2. Create backup of 2016-03-10 shard from a server that was up the entire day
3. Restore the backup of the shard from the good server to the server that had downtime
4. Tell the load balancer to resume sending queries to the previously downed server

During this entire process the Relays should be sending current writes to all servers, including the one with downtime.

#### Sharding

It's possible to add another layer on top of this kind of setup to shard data. Depending on your needs you could shard on the measurement name or a specific tag like `customer_id`. The sharding layer would have to service both queries and writes.

#### Caveats

While `influxdb-relay` does provide some level of high availability, there are a few scenarios that need to be accounted for:

- `influxdb-relay` will not relay the `/query` endpoint, and this includes schema modification (create database, `DROP`s, etc). This means that databases must be created before points are written to the backends.
- Continuous queries will still only write their results locally. If a server goes down, the continuous query will have to be backfilled after the data has been recovered for that instance.
- Overwriting points is potentially unpredictable. For example, given servers A and B, if B is down, and point X is written (we'll call the value X1) just before B comes back online, that write is queued behind every other write that occurred while B was offline. Once B is back online, the first buffered write succeeds, and all new writes are now allowed to pass-through. At this point (before X1 is written to B), X is written again (with value X2 this time) to both A and B. When the relay reaches the end of B's buffered writes, it will write X (with value X1) to B... At this point A now has X2, but B has X1.
  - It is probably best to avoid re-writing points (if possible). Otherwise, please be aware that overwriting the same field for a given point can lead to data differences.
  - This could potentially be mitigated by waiting for the buffer to flush before opening writes back up to being passed-through.


### Resources:
* Read more about it in the [InfluxDB Docs](https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/latest/).
* https://www.influxdata.com/blog/multiple-data-center-replication-influxdb/
* https://www.influxdata.com/time-series-database/
* https://github.com/influxdata/influxdb-relay
* https://www.influxdata.com/university/
---

* https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/latest/administration/backup_and_restore/
* https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/latest/concepts/glossary/
* https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/latest/query_language/schema_exploration/
