---
title: "2.1 - Laboratory: Installation and setup"
excerpt: "RHCSA: Red Hat Certified System Administrator Guide"
last_modified_at: 2018-01-02 21:28:04 +00:00
toc: true
---


and restart network and check the IP / status:
```console
root@rhel7:~# systemctl restart network
root@rhel7:~$ systemctl status network
root@rhel7:~$ ip a
root@rhel7:~$ ping google.com
```

3. Now type which time . This shows the filename /bin/time that was found in the
$PATH variable.
4. Type echo $PATH to show the contents of the $PATH variable. You can see
that /bin is included in the list, but because there also is an internal command
time , the time command from the path will not be executed unless you tell the
shell specifically to do so.

Just right-click the graphical desktop and select Open
in Terminal.

From one of the terminal windows, type the command su - and enter the pass-
word of the root user. Then, type tail -f /var/log/secure . This opens a trace on
the file /var/log/secure, where you can monitor security events in real time.

3. From the terminal window, type w . This will give an overview of all users that
are currently logged in. Notice the column that mentions the tty the users are
on, in which you see :0 that refers to the console, and pts/0 which refers to the
terminal window.

3. Type ls > /dev/null . This redirects the STDOUT to the null device, with the
result that you will not see it.
4. Type ls ilwehgi > /dev/null . This command shows a “no such file or directory”
message onscreen. You see the message because it is not STDOUT, but an
error message that is written to STDERR.
5. Type ls ilwehgi 2> /dev/null . Now you will not see the error message
anymore.
9. Type echo hello > output . This overwrites the contents of the output file.
10. Type ls >> output . This appends the result of the ls command to the output
file.

6. From the first terminal session, type Ctrl+R . From the prompt that opens now,
type ls . You’ll see the last ls command you used. Press Ctrl+R again. You’ll
now see that you are looking backward and that the previous ssh command is
highlighted. Press Enter to execute it.


#### Key login
* Create an SSH key pair with no passphrase
```console
root@rhel7:~#  ssh-keygen
  ## press twice enter for no passphrase
```
* Send your public key to your host server
```console
root@rhel7:~# ssh-copy-id marcelo@mo
```
* Verify that it can actually be used for authentican, displaying the hostame of your guest
```console
root@rhel7:~# ssh marcelo@mo 'hostname'
```
