---
title: "RHCSA - Red Hat Certified System Administrator Guide"
excerpt: "This certification guide will provide a comprehensive overview of Linux RHEL 7,
covering the EX200 exam topics."
last_modified_at: 2018-01-02 21:28:04 +00:00
toc: true
---

##### Securely Transferring Files Between Systems
If a host is running the sshd service, that service can also be used to securely transfer
files between systems. To do that, you can use the scp command. This command is
very similar to the cp command, which is used to copy local files, but it does include
an option that allows it to work with remote hosts. You can use scp to copy files and
subdirectories to remote hosts, and subdirectories as well. To copy, for instance, the
/etc/hosts file to the /tmp directory on server2 using your current user account, use
the following command:
scp /etc/hosts server2:/tmp
If you want to connect to server2 as user root to copy the /etc/passwd file to your
home directory, you use the following command:
scp root@server2:/etc/passwd ~
You can also use scp to copy an entire subdirectory structure. To do so, use the -r
command, as in the following command:
scp -r server2:/etc/ /tmp
Notice that the scp command can be configured to connect to a non-default SSH
port also. It is a bit confusing, but to do this with the scp command, you need the
-P option followed by the port number you want to connect to. Notice that ssh uses
-p (lowercase) to specify the port it needs to connect to; the scp command uses an
uppercase -P .
As an alternative to using scp for copying files between servers, you might
be interested in the rsync command. The basic use of rsync is similar to the use of
scp , and it also uses the sshd service to securely copy files. Rsync, however, does
offer advanced options that enable you to synchronize files and directories based
on a delta sync. That means that only differences are synchronized, which makes
this a very efficient solution for keeping files and directories the same between
hosts.

##### Using the screen Command
You do not have to know about it for either RHCSA or RHCE, but the screen com-
mand is a useful command that allows you to open multiple terminal sessions, even
if you are not in a graphical session. It does not just allow you to run multiple termi-
nals but also allows you to share a session with other users, or to attach and detach
to remote terminal sessions. Before you can use screen, you need to install it. To do
this, use the yum install -y screen command. Then, type screen to open a screen
session. From the screen session, you can start any command you like.
The screen command is particularly useful when used from an SSH session. You
can start a task that takes a long time from a screen session, detach from it, and
attach to it later. The command continues running, even if you are going home and
shut down your computer. The next day, you can easily attach to the screen session
again to complete the task. To do this, just follow a simple procedure:
1. Open an SSH session.
2. From the SSH session, type screen to open a screen session.
3. Start whichever task you want to start and keep it running.
4. Use the Ctrl+a, d key sequence to detach from the screen session and log out
from the SSH session.
5. When you are ready to reconnect, start the SSH session again. It is essential
that you are using the same user account that you used before.
6. Attach to the screen session again using screen -r . You can now conveniently
finish the work that you have started from the screen session before.
While working with screen, you are working in a specific application. From within
this application you can issue specific commands. To use these specific screen com-
mands, start by typing Ctrl+a, ? . This shows a list of all commands that are avail-
able. Every screen command is started with the Ctrl+a key sequence. An important
command to remember is Ctrl+a, / , which will close the screen session. Make sure
to remove screen sessions that you do not need anymore, otherwise they will stay
active until the next time you reboot your server!

If while trying to attach to a screen session you get a message that multiple screen
sessions are currently running, you need to be more specific. To find out which
screen sessions currently are running, use the screen -ls command. This command
shows you all screen sessions that are currently running. In Listing 5.2 , you can see
how multiple screen sessions are detached from, and how the screen -r command
gives a list of all currently available screen sessions, from which you can select the
screen session you want to connect to by adding the number of the screen session to
the screen -r command.

You can also use screen to work together with other users in the same session. To
do this, follow these steps:
1. Make sure that both users are using SSH to connect to the system where you
want to work on together. Both users must use the same user account when
using SSH to connect.
2. One user needs to start a screen session, using the screen command.
3. The second user can just connect to the screen session, using screen -x .

A	**process**	is	a	program	or	command	running	on	the	system.	Every	process	has	a
unique	numeric	identifier	and	it	is	managed	by	the	kernel.	It	may	be	viewed,
listed,	niced,	and	reniced.	A	process	is	in	one	of	several	states	at	any	given	time
during	its	lifecycle.	There	are	several	signals	that	may	be	passed	to	a	process	to
kill	or	terminate	it,	among	other	actions.	A	program	or	command	may	be	run	in	a
way	that	precludes	termination	by	a	hangup	signal	(such	as	the	disconnection	of
the	terminal	session	in	which	the	program	or	command	is	running).

**Job	scheduling**	allows	a	user	to	schedule	a	command	for	a	one-time	or	recurring
execution	in	future.	A	job	may	be	submitted	and	managed	by	any	authorized
user.	All	executed	jobs	are	logged.


**Rebooting** - When a server is rebooted, all processes that are running need to shut down properly, using the `reboot` command.

> Rebooting a Linux server is an important task on the RHCSA as well as on the RHCE exam. Everything you have configured should still be working after the server has rebooted. So, make sure that you reboot at least once during the exam, but also after making critical modifications to the server configuration.
