---
title: "Python: Introduction"
permalink: /python/intro/
excerpt: "Notes and resources about python."
header:
  image: "/assets/images/academy/python.svg"
last_modified_at: 2022-12-26 00:00:00 +00:00
toc: true
---

Python is a dynamic and strongly typed, object-oriented programming, that employs both duck typing and gradual typing (via type hints).

Supports multiple programming paradigms including both imperative (object-oriented, procedural) and declarative (functional, concurrent) flavors, but internally, everything in Python is an object.

Python was created by Guido van Rossum and first released in 1991. The Python Software Foundation manages and directs resources for Python and CPython development and receives proposals for changes to the language from members of the community via a **PEP** (Python Enhancement Proposal).

## Basics

### Indentation

Python puts a strong emphasis on code readability and uses significant indentation for function, method, and class definitions, described in [PEP20](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0020/)
  * https://blog.startifact.com/posts/older/what-is-pythonic.html.

There is no strict indentation amount (either space OR [tab] characters are acceptable), but indentation must be consistent for all indented statements.
Inconsistent indentation will raise an error: `IndentationError: unindent does not match any outer indentation level`

### Comments

Comments in Python start with a `#` that is not part of a string, and end at line termination. Python does not support multi-line comment marks.

```python
# this is a comment
```

#### REPL

REPL is the language shell, the Python Interactive Shell. The REPL acronym is short for Read, Eval, Print and Loop.

```console
~ $ python
>>>
```

### Objects
Objects are assigned to names via the assignment operator `=`

**Variables** are written in `lower_case` and constants usually in `UPPER_CASE`. A name (variable or constant) is not itself typed, and can be attached or re-attached to different objects over its lifetime.

```python
>>> var = 1
>>> var = "hello"
>>> print(var)
"hello"
```

**Constants** are typically defined on a module or global level, and although they can be changed, they are intended to be named only once.

### Functions

The keyword `def` begins a function definition, followed by the `name()` with a list of zero or more parameters (order matters), of several different varieties, terminated with a colon `;`.

```python
# Function definition
def my_function(parameter1, parameter2):
  # do something
  return result
```

Functions explicitly return a value or object via the return keyword and with no explicit return expression, will return `None`.

The function call is going to look similar to the function definition.

```python
# It's storing the function output that is returned in a new variable called function_result
function_result = my_function(3, 3)
```

The number of arguments passed in the parentheses must match the number of parameters in the original function definition, unless default arguments have been used:

Adding a default value for a parameter can defend against such errors:

```python
def my_function(parameter1, parameter2=2):
```

### Methods

Methods bound to class names are invoked via dot notation `.`, as are functions, constants, or global names imported as part of a module:

```python
# This is a method call of the str *class*.
>>> text = "example"
>>> str.upper(text)
"EXAMPLE"
```

### Documentation

The first statement of a function body can optionally be a **docstring**, which concisely summarizes the function or object's purpose. Docstrings are read by automated documentation tools and are returned by calling `.__doc__()` on the function, method, or class name and their conventions are laid out in [PEP257](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0257/).


```python
# An example on a user-defined function.
def my_function(parameter1, parameter2):
    """Example of a function

    :param parameter1: int the base number.
    :param parameter2: int the power to raise the base number to.
    :return: int - number raised to power of second number

    Takes number_one and raises it to the power of number_two, returning the result.
    """

    return number_one ** number_two

>>> print(my_function.__doc__)
Returns float or int.

       Takes number_one and raises it to the power of number_two, returning the result.
```
